---
layout: post
author: luthfan
title: Can we actually make changes?
categories: blog-posts
---

Shit, in the plural form, have been happening back home.

In a democratic country, the first thing that comes to mind whenever there is discontent in the population is protests. Assemble, march, shout society's grievances with your comrade. The catch is that peaceful protests generally lead nowhere. Case in point Kamisan, a weekly protest held continuously for decades yet yielding zero results. 

<!---
Why you might ask, when all the silk batik-clad men on TV says that if the protests are peaceful they will surely listen. 
-->

Why you might ask. Now, imagine yourself a *humble* elected member of DPR dismounting from your state-paid European car, you hear the periodical noise of the peaceful public from beyond the tall fences. You see men in uniforms standing guard, legally allowed to inflict force upon your constituents if the need should arise. You feel relieved and safe, you forget those bothersome noise because you figure they would get tired anyway and they would eventually have to go to home and go back to work any seconds. So you go on your way to another nap meeting to dream about your next work visit to Japan.
 
Unfulfilled promises fuel anger. Anger heats up and reaches the boiling point. Non-violence stops becoming the sole option. Rather non-violence stops becoming an option. Rocks start to get thrown, harsh words get exchanged. Disruption spreads and people, not just those who took on the street, begin to feel the reality of the situation.

You, the *humble* parliamentarian, forcefully got woken up from your nap because some lazy students have started climbing the fence. You clutched your pearls, Mikimoto you bought last time in Ginza, then picked up your phone to see your loyal donator who has provided a great number of below minimum wage jobs in your constituency complained that their workers have been missing work because of the prolonged protests. The disruption is now personal. Like clockwork the police is alerted and weapons take center stage. Every swing of a baton, every rubber bullet slowly pushes the loud voice back into silence. If somehow the absurdly expensive weapons are insufficient, you send in provacateurs to split the protesters' ranks then ridiculously blame the innocents they have burned the same train station they depend on for their livelihood. If still the youths are insistent on their resistance, the government still has another card up their sleeve, a junta if necessary.

Even in a democracy, protests run into many roadblocks.

"Practice the virtue of democracy! Elect good people!" one might suggest.

Election is not easy[^1]. To elect good people, voters need to be educated. When education is stifled and teachers are considered a burden to the state budget[^2]. 

Does this look like the end of the country? Of course not. The economy grows and things do get better, even at a snail pace. However, it cannot be denied that there are clear systemic dysfunctions that if they are not addressed, we are just going to be stuck in cycle of mostly failing protests and ever growing state power.

Despite all this, is there anything we can do? More specifically, is there anything I can do to help?

[^1]: I don't read a lot of papers in humanities, but ["Democracy Devouring Itself: The Rise of the Incompetent Citizen and the Appeal of Right Wing Populism"](Democracy Devouring Itself: The Rise of the Incompetent Citizen and the Appeal of Right Wing Populism) is a good read on this subject.

[^2] [Sri Mulyani's speech about teacher's wage](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X2zHqF-wxSg)